[Spike] Re-organise contents (#13)
futureversecom/trn-docs: docs/build/substrate/core-concepts.md

---
title: Core Concepts
---

The Substrate JavaScript API on the Root Network (`@therootnetwork/api`) is built on top of the Polkadot JavaScript API (`@polkadot/api`). It provides application developers the ability to query and interact with TRN node using Javascript/Typescript.

One of the most important things to understand about the `@polkadot/api` is that most interfaces are actually generated automatically when it connects to a running node. This is quite a departure from other APIs in projects where the interfaces are static. While sounding quite scary, it actually is a powerful concept that exists in any Substrate chains, and allows the API to be used in environments where the chain is customized.

To unpack this, we will start with the Metadata and explain what it actually provides, since it is critical for understanding how to interact with the API and any underlying chain.

### Metadata

> When the API connects to a node, one of the first things it does is to retrieve the metadata and decorate the API based on the metadata information. The metadata effectively provides data in the form of `api.<type>.<module>.<section>` that fits into one of the following categories -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the API connects to a node, one of the first things it does is to retrieve the metadata and decorate the API based on the metadata information. The metadata effectively provides data in the form of `api.<type>.<module>.<section>` that fits into one of the following categories:
```

As a minimum, anything returned by the API, be it a `Vec<...>`, `Option<...>`, `Struct` or any normal type will always have the following methods - as defined on the `Codec` interface:

- `.eq(<other value>)` - checks for equality against the other value. In all cases, it will accept "like" values, i.e. in the case of a number you can pass a primitive (such as `1`), a hex value (such as `0x01`) or even an `Unit8Array`
- `toHex()` - returns a hex-base representation of the value, always prefixed by `0x`
- `toHuman()` - returns Human-parsable JSON structure with values formatted as per the settings
- `toJSON()` - returns a JSON-like representation of the value, this is generally used when calling `JSON.stringify(...)` on the value
- `toString()` - returns a string representation, in some cases this performs additional encoding, i.e. for `Address`, `AccountId` and `AccountIndex` it will encode to the ss58 address
- `.toU8a()` - returns a `Uint8Array` representation of the encoded value (generally exactly as passed to the node, where values are SCALE encoded)

> Additionally, the following getters and utilities are available -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the following getters and utilities are available:
```

- `.isEmpty` - `true` if the value is an all-empty value, i.e. `0` in for numbers, all-zero for Arrays (or anything `Uint8Array`), `false` is non-zero
- `.hash` - a `Hash` (once again with all the methods above) that is a `blake2-256` representation of the contained value

### Chain defaults

> In addition to the `api.[consts | query | tx]` detailed above, the API, upon connecting to a chain, fills in some information and makes it available directly on the API interface. These include -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the `api.[consts | query | tx]` detailed above, the API, upon connecting to a chain, fills in some information and makes it available directly on the API interface. These include:
```

- `api.genesisHash` - The genesisHash of the connected chain
- `api.runtimeMetadata` - The metadata as retrieved from the chain
- `api.runtimeVersion` - The chain runtime version (including spec/impl. versions and types)

### Query Chain State (`api.rpc.<pallet>.<method>`)

> The `api.rpc` provides low-level interfaces to read the chain state that's not necessary bound to the pallet storage. It's also the common place to add additional data query for the custom pallets, e.g `api.rpc.tokenUri`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `api.rpc` provides low-level interfaces to read the chain state that's not necessary bound to the pallet storage. It's also the common place to add additional data query for the custom pallets, e.g `api.rpc.tokenUri`.
```

```js
// Initialize the API as in previous sections
...

// Retrieve the chain name
const chain = await api.rpc.system.chain();

// Retrieve the latest header
const lastHeader = await api.rpc.chain.getHeader();

// Log the information
console.log(`${chain}: last block #${lastHeader.number} has hash ${lastHeader.hash}`);
```

> There areIt's possible to subscribe to RPC calls and receive up-to-date data, for instance, subscribe to a new block height change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's possible to subscribe to RPC calls and receive up-to-date data, for instance, subscribe to a new block height change.
```

In general, whenever we create a subscription, we would like to cleanup after ourselves and unsubscribe, so assuming we only want to log the first 10 headers, the above example demonstrates the use of the `unsubscribe()` function.

### Query Chain Storage (`api.query.<pallet>.<method>`)

The `api.query` interfaces are used to read the public storage in each available pallet. Behind the scene, the API uses the metadata information provided to construct queries based on the location and parameters provided to generate state keys, and then queries these via RPC.

```js
// Initialize the API as in previous sections
...

// The actual address that we will use
const ADDR = '0xE04CC55ebEE1cBCE552f250e85c57B70B2E2625b';

const [now, { nonce, data: balance }] = await Promise.all([
  api.query.timestamp.now(),
  api.query.system.account(ADDR)
]);

console.log(`${now}: balance of ${balance.free} and a nonce of ${nonce}`);
```

> Similar to RPC calls, sometimes it's necessary to subscribe to the chain state to handle your application logic. Fortunately, the API provides a straightforward way to do that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to RPC calls, sometimes it's necessary to subscribe to the chain state to handle your application logic. Fortunately, the API provides a straightforward way to do that.
```

```js
...

// Retrieve the current timestamp via subscription
const unsubscribe = await api.query.timestamp.now((moment) => {
  console.log(`The last block has a timestamp of ${moment}`);

  // unsubscribe(); call to stop receiving updates
});
```

Instead of the `await` returning the actual once-off value, it returns a subscription `unsubscribe()` function that can be used to stop the subscription and clear up any underlying RPC connections. The supplied callback will contain the value as it changes, streamed from the node.

### Submit Transaction (`api.tx.<pallet>.<method>`)

Transaction endpoints are exposed, as determined by the metadata, on the `api.tx` endpoint. These allow you to submit transactions for inclusion in blocks, be it transfers, setting information or anything else your chain supports.

> The Root Network supports the ECDSA key-pair standard, to submit transaction, make sure you have a valid account with a small `$XRP` tokens to pay for transaction fee and create a `keyring` instance as follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Root Network supports the ECDSA key-pair standard. To submit a transaction, make sure you have a valid account with a small amount of `$XRP` tokens to cover the transaction fee, and create a `keyring` instance as follows:
```

```js
import { Keyring } from '@polkadot/keyring';
import { stringToU8a, u8aToHex, hexToU8a } from "@polkadot/util";

// create a keyring with some non-default values specified
const keyring = new Keyring({ type: 'ethereum' });
const seedU8a = hexToU8a(ALICE_PRIVATE_KEY);
const alice = keyring.addFromSeed(seedU8a);
```

> Once that done, to transfer a balance from Alice to Bob, use the code below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once that done, to transfer a balance from Alice to Bob, use the code below:
```

```js
...
// Sign and send a transfer from Alice to Bob
const txHash = await api.tx.balances
  .transfer(BOB, 12345)
  .signAndSend(alice);

// Show the hash
console.log(`Submitted with hash ${txHash}`);
```

The result for this call is the transaction hash. This is a hash of the data and receiving this does not mean that transaction has been included, but rather only that it has been accepted for propagation by the node.

:::caution

> Transaction hash in Substrate-based blockchain is generally unique within a block but not across the chain, [check out this article](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/build-protocol-info#unique-identifiers-for-extrinsics) for more details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction hash in Substrate-based blockchain is generally unique within a block but not across the chain, [check out this article](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/build-protocol-info#unique-identifiers-for-extrinsics) for more details.
```

    } else if (result.status.isFinalized) {
      console.log(`Transaction finalized at blockHash ${result.status.asFinalized}`);
      unsubscribe();
    }
  });
```

As per all previous subscriptions, the transaction subscription returns in `unsubscribe()` and the actual method has a subscription callback. The `result` object has 2 parts, `events` (to be covered in the next section) and the `status` enum.

When the `status` enum is in `Finalized` state (checked via `isFinalized`), the underlying value contains the block hash of the block where the transaction has been finalized. `Finalized` will follow `InBlock`, which is the block where the transaction has been included. `InBlock` does not mean the block is finalized, but rather applies to the transaction state, where `Finalized` means that the transaction cannot be forked off the chain.

### Transaction Events

Any transaction will emit events, as a bare minimum this will always be either a `system.ExtrinsicSuccess` or `system.ExtrinsicFailed` event for the specific transaction. These provide the overall execution result for the transaction, i.e. execution has succeeded or failed.

> epending on the transaction sent, some other events may however be emitted, for instance for a `balances.transfer` this could include one or more of `Transfer`, `NewAccount` or `ReapedAccount`, as defined in the substrate `balances` event defaults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the transaction sent, some other events may however be emitted, for instance for a `balances.transfer` this could include one or more of `Transfer`, `NewAccount` or `ReapedAccount`, as defined in the substrate `balances` event defaults.
```

> To display or act on these events, we can do the following -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display or act on these events, we can do the following:
```

```js
...
// Make a transfer from Alice to BOB, waiting for inclusion
const unsubscribe = await api.tx.balances
  .transfer(BOB, 12345)
  .signAndSend(alice, ({ events = [], status, txHash }) => {
    console.log(`Current status is ${status.type}`);

    if (status.isFinalized) {
      console.log(`Transaction included at blockHash ${status.asFinalized}`);
      console.log(`Transaction hash ${txHash.toHex()}`);

      // Loop through Vec<EventRecord> to display all events
      events.forEach(({ phase, event: { data, method, section } }) => {
        console.log(`\t' ${phase}: ${section}.${method}:: ${data}`);
      });

      unsubscribe();
    }
  });
```

:::caution

Be aware that when a transaction status is `isFinalized`, it means it is included, but it may still have failed - for instance if you try to send a larger amount that you have free, the transaction is included in a block, however from a end-user perspective the transaction failed since the transfer did not occur. In these cases a `system.ExtrinsicFailed` event will be available in the events array.

:::

### Payment Information

> The RPC endpoints exposes weight/payment information that takes an encoded extrinsic and calculates the on-chain weight fees for it. A wrapper for this is available on the tx itself, taking exactly the same parameters as you would pass to a normal `.signAndSend` operation, specifically `.paymentInfo(sender, <any options>)`. To expand on our previous example -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RPC endpoints exposes weight/payment information that takes an encoded extrinsic and calculates the on-chain weight fees for it. A wrapper for this is available on the tx itself, taking exactly the same parameters as you would pass to a normal `.signAndSend` operation, specifically `.paymentInfo(sender, <any options>)`. To expand on our previous example:
```
